Add a guide about publishing dists via GH Actions (#647)
pypa/packaging.python.org: source/guides/publishing-package-distribution-releases-using-github-actions-ci-cd-workflows.rst

=============================================================================
Publishing package distribution releases using GitHub Actions CI/CD workflows
=============================================================================

> `GitHub Actions CI/CD`_ allow you to run a series of commands

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`GitHub Actions CI/CD`_ allows you to run a series of commands
```

whenever an event occurs on the GitHub platform. One
popular choice is having a workflow that's triggered by a
``push`` event.
This guide shows you how to publish a Python distribution

> package whenever a tagged commit is pushed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
whenever a tagged commit is pushed.
```

.. attention::

   This guide *assumes* that you already have a project that

>    you know how to build dists for and *it lives on GitHub*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   you know how to build distributions for and *it lives on GitHub*.
```

.. warning::

   At the time of writing, `GitHub Actions CI/CD`_
   is in public beta. If you don't have it enabled,
   you should `join the waitlist`_ to gain access.

   GitHub Actions will be generally available on November

>    13th, 2019.

Reviewer 2: Seems like this is already more or less true: https://twitter.com/natfriedman/status/1174158823877042177?s=20

Author: Right, he announced this in the yesterday's stream along with the security announcements. But he also mentioned this information in the previous stream, about a month ago.

Author: Are you suggesting that we remove this note? Or is it fine to keep it till the given date?

Reviewer: I think the note could be removed now, basically you're now in the beta immediately without any waitlist 👍

Author: Should I only delete this sentence or the whole warning?

Saving credentials on GitHub
============================

> In this guide, we'll demonstrate uploading to both production

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this guide, we'll demonstrate uploading to both
```

> PyPI and Test PyPI meaning that we'll have two separate sets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PyPI and TestPyPI, meaning that we'll have two separate sets
```

> of creds. And we'll need to save them in the GitHub repo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of credentials. And we'll need to save them in the GitHub repository
```

settings.

Let's begin! 🚀

1. Go to https://pypi.org/manage/account/#api-tokens and
   create a new `API token`_. If you have the project on PyPI
   already, limit the token scope to just that project.
   You can call it something like
   ``GitHub Actions CI/CD — project-org/project-repo``
   in order for it to be easily distinguishable in the token
   list.
   **Don't close the page just yet — you won't see that token
   again.**
2. In a separate browser tab or window, go to the ``Settings``
   tab of your target repository and then click on `Secrets`_
   in the left sidebar.
3. Create a new secret called ``pypi_password`` and copy-paste
   the token from the fist step.

> 4. Now, go to https://test.pypi.org/manage/account/#api-tokens

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a note here that you might need to create a TestPyPI account? The fact that PyPI accounts don't work on TestPyPI often confuses users.

Author: Fair enough, I'll add this info.

>    and repeat the steps. Save that Test PyPI token on GitHub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   and repeat the steps. Save that TestPyPI token on GitHub
```

>    as ``test_pypi_password``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   as ``testpypi_password``.
```

Author: I think that it's better readable to maintain snake_case here.

Reviewer: Is `testpypi_password` the snake_case version of TestPyPI (no space)?

Author: `TestPyPI` is CamelCase version and it's clearly visible that test is a separate word, even though it's spelled together in the capitalized version. So I consider `test_pypi_password` a proper snake_case version.

Creating a workflow definition
==============================

> GitHub CI/CD workflows are declared in YAML files stored under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GitHub CI/CD workflows are declared in YAML files stored in the
```

> ``.github/workflows/`` of your repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``.github/workflows/`` directory of your repository.
```

> Let's create ``.github/workflows/publish-to-test-pypi.yml``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's create a ``.github/workflows/publish-to-test-pypi.yml``
```

file.

Start it with a meaningful name and define the event that
should make GitHub run this workflow:

> .. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-test-pypi.yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-testpypi.yml
```

Author: I think, it's better readable to keep the separation.

   :language: yaml
   :end-before: jobs:

Defining a workflow job environment
===================================

Now, let's add initial setup for our job. It's a process that
will execute commands that we'll define later.

> In this guide, we'll choose to use Ubuntu 18.04:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, we'll use Ubuntu 18.04:
```

> .. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-test-pypi.yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-testpypi.yml
```

   :language: yaml
   :start-after: on:
   :end-before: steps:

> Checking out the project and building dists

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Checking out the project and building distributions
```

> ===========================================

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
===================================================
```

Then, add the following under the ``build-n-publish`` section:

> .. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-test-pypi.yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-testpypi.yml
```

   :language: yaml
   :start-after: runs-on:
   :end-before: Install pep517

This will download your repository into the CI runner and then
install and activate Python 3.7.

And now we can build dists from source. In this example, we'll
use ``pep517`` package, assuming that your project has a
``pyproject.toml`` properly set up (see

> :pep:`517`/:pep:`518`).

Reviewer 2: Maybe this would be a good place to explain what the pep517 package is? Most users haven't seen this before.

Author: Yeah, I wasn't sure about this. AFAIK it's not really intended for end-users but it was an easy way to inject "some way" of building dists as I'm trying not to focus on building in this guide and point users to their favorite building methods...

.. tip::

>    You can use any other method for building dists as long as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   You can use any other method for building distributions as long as
```

   it produces ready-to-upload artifacts saved into the
   ``dist/`` folder.

So add this to the steps list:

> .. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-test-pypi.yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-testpypi.yml
```

   :language: yaml
   :start-after: version: 3.7

>    :end-before: Actualy publish to PyPIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :end-before: Actually publish to PyPI/TestPyPI
```

> Publishing dist to Test PyPI and production PyPI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Publishing the distribution to PyPI and TestPyPI
```

================================================

Finally, add the following steps at the end:

.. literalinclude:: github-actions-ci-cd-sample/publish-to-test-pypi.yml
   :language: yaml

>    :start-after: Actualy publish to PyPIs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   :start-after: Actually publish to PyPI/TestPyPI
```

These two steps use the `pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish`_ GitHub
Action: the first one uploads contents of the ``dist/`` folder

> into Test PyPI unconditionally and the second does that to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into TestPyPI unconditionally and the second does that to
```

> production PyPI but only if the current commit is tagged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PyPI, but only if the current commit is tagged.
```

That's all, folks!
==================

> Now, whenever you push a tagged commit to your Git repo remote

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, whenever you push a tagged commit to your Git repository remote
```

on GitHub, this workflow will publish it to PyPI.

> And it'll publish any push to Test PyPI which is useful for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And it'll publish any push to TestPyPI which is useful for
```

> Publishing Package Distribution 📦 Releases Using GitHub Actions CI/CD Workflows 🤖

Reviewer: Other guides (well, the two I checked :) use sentence case for titles:

```suggestion
Publishing package distribution 📦 releases using GitHub Actions CI/CD workflows 🤖
```

Author: Are you sure? I've title-cased this because I saw it in some other guides. Let me check...

Author: Alright, you're correct. I'm probably confused about something else I saw.

> Publishing Package Distribution 📦 Releases Using GitHub Actions CI/CD Workflows 🤖

Reviewer 3: Minor style nit - I don't think we normally use emoji in titles, and in this particular case, I think it makes the title less readable. Maybe stick to simple text?

Author: I think it's a matter of taste. For me, emojis make things more lively. As a side-effect — I often use them in places to also test Unicode-related issues.

I feel like the robot face makes it more relatable, pointing out that it's a kind of automation.
As for the package, it may be redundant given that the whole web-site is about packaging.

Personally, I'd like to keep emojis but if you have a rather strong opinion, I'll be happy to drop them.
WDYT?

Reviewer 4: This is a nit so I won't say anything be saying much here -- just noting my preferences once.

I prefer if we drop emoji from the title. I'm 100% for having them in the prose/content of the guide.

===================================================================================

`GitHub Actions CI/CD`_ allow you to run a series of commands

> whenever an event occurs in the GitHub Platform. One of the

Reviewer: Briefer:
```suggestion
whenever an event occurs on GitHub. One
```

Author: I feel like just "GitHub", in most of the human minds, refers to something that's viewable on the surface, like the UI-visible things. I think that it's a bit inaccurate because there's events that many people almost never hear, like `deployment`, or `schedule`, or event custom events that Actions support too.

Reviewer: Makes sense. How about "on the GitHub platform"?

Author: Sounds good.

Author: ```suggestion
whenever an event occurs on the GitHub platform. One
```

> popular choices is having a workflow that's triggered by a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
popular choice is having a workflow that's triggered by a
```

``push`` event.

> This guide will show you how to publish a Python distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide shows you how to publish a Python distribution
```

package whenever a tagged commit is pushed.

.. attention::

   This guide *assumes* that you already have a project that
   you know how to build dists for and *it lives on GitHub*.

.. warning::

>    At the time of writing this guide, `GitHub Actions CI/CD`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   At the time of writing, `GitHub Actions CI/CD`_
```

>    is still in public beta. If you don't have it enabled,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   is in public beta. If you don't have it enabled,
```

>    you should join the waitlist in order to gain the access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   you should join the waitlist to gain access.
```

And add link to where to join waitlist? https://github.com/features/actions/signup/

>    N.B. It is known that GitHub is going to make Actions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   GitHub Actions will be generally available on November 13th, 2019.
```

>    publicly available on the Nov 13th, 2019.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Saving credentials on GitHub
----------------------------

In this guide, we'll demonstrate uploading to both production
PyPI and Test PyPI meaning that we'll have two separate sets

> of creds. And we'll need to save them in GitHub repo settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of creds. And we'll need to save them in the GitHub repo settings.
```

Let's begin! 🚀

> 1. Go to https://pypi.org/manage/account/#api-tokens and

Reviewer: Maybe put the Test PyPI instructions before production PyPI?

Author: I think users usually have an account on prod, but rarely on test...

Reviewer 5: [python-١.tiff](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/23314907/python-.tiff)

   create a new `API token`_. If you have the project on PyPI

>    already, please limit the token scope to just that project.

Reviewer: For brevity:
```suggestion
   already, limit the token scope to just that project.
```

>    You can call it smth like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can call it something like
```

   ``GitHub Actions CI/CD — project-org/project-repo``
   in order for it to be easily distinguishable in the token
   list.
   **Don't close the page just yet — you won't see that token
   again.**
2. In a separate browser tab or window, go to the ``Settings``
   tab of your target repository and then click on `Secrets`_
   in the left sidebar.
3. Create a new secret called ``pypi_password`` and copy-paste
   the token from the fist step.
4. Now, go to https://test.pypi.org/manage/account/#api-tokens
   and repeat the steps. Save that Test PyPI token on GitHub
   as ``test_pypi_password``.

Creating a workflow definition
------------------------------

> GitHub CI/CD Workflows are declared in YAML files stored under

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GitHub CI/CD workflows are declared in YAML files stored under
```

> ``.github/`` of your repository.

Reviewer: I've only seen them in `.github/workflows/`. Can they go in `.github/`? Should they be standardised in `.github/workflows/`?

Author: Ah, it's my mistake.
```suggestion
``.github/workflows/`` of your repository.
```

> Start it with a meaningful name and define the even that

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
Start it with a meaningful name and define the event that
```

should make GitHub run this workflow:

.. code-block:: yaml

>    name: Publish Python 🐛 distribution package 📦 to PyPIs

Reviewer: 🐛 is a bug, not a snake :)

Author: ```suggestion
   name: Publish Python 🐍 distribution package 📦 to PyPIs
```

   on: push

Defining a workflow job environment
-----------------------------------

Now, let's add initial setup for our job. It's a process that
will execute commands that we'll define later.
In this guide, we'll choose to use Ubuntu 18.04:

.. code-block:: yaml

   build-n-publish:
     name: Build and publish Python 🐛 dist 📦 to PyPIs
     runs-on: ubuntu-18.04

Checking out the project and building dists
-------------------------------------------

Then, add the following under the ``build-n-publish`` section:

.. code-block:: yaml

     steps:
     - uses: actions/checkout@master
     - name: Set up Python 3.7
       uses: actions/setup-python@v1
       with:
         version: 3.7

This will download your repository into the CI runner and then
install and activate Python 3.7.

And now we can build dists from source. In this example, we'll
use ``pep517`` package, *assuming that your project has a ``pyproject.toml`` properly set up (see :pep:`517`/:pep:`518`)*.

.. tip::

   You can use any other method for building dists as long as

>    it produces ready-to-upload artifacts saved into ``dist/``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   it produces ready-to-upload artifacts saved into the ``dist/``
```

   folder.

So add this to the steps list:

.. code-block:: yaml

     - name: Install pep517
       run: >-
         python -m
         pip install
         pep517
         --user
     - name: Build a binary wheel and a source tarball
       run: >-
         python -m
         pep517.build
         --source
         --binary
         --out-dir dist/
         .

Publishing dist to Test PyPI and production PyPI
------------------------------------------------

> Finally, add the following steps in the end:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, add the following steps at the end:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

     - name: Publish 📦 to Test PyPI
       uses: pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish@master
       with:
         password: ${{ secrets.test_pypi_password }}
         repository_url: https://test.pypi.org/legacy/
     - name: Publish 📦 to production PyPI
       if: startsWith(github.event.ref, 'refs/tags')
       uses: pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish@master
       with:
         password: ${{ secrets.pypi_password }}

> These two steps use `pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish`_ GitHub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two steps use the `pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish`_ GitHub
```

> Action: the first one uploads contents of the `dist/` folder

Reviewer: Remember double backticks for code in RST
```suggestion
Action: the first one uploads contents of the` `dist/`` folder
```

Author: Right! I missed this place, thanks!

Author: @hugovk could you please edit your suggestion and shift the left backtick to the right? The current one has a space between opening backticks making it invalid.

Reviewer: Oops, fixed!

into Test PyPI unconditionally and the second does that to
production PyPI but only if the current commit is tagged.

That's all, folks!
------------------

Now, whenever you push a tagged commit to your Git repo remote
on GitHub, this workflow will publish it to PyPI.
And it'll publish any push to Test PyPI which is useful for
providing test builds to your alpha users as well as making

> sure that your release pipeline keeps being healthy! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sure that your release pipeline remains healthy! 
```
